
We saw how to compute the [[Wave function#Expectation values|average position]] and the spread of a particle. We now aim to do the same for the generalised momenta of the particle. Classically, we saw that a [[Hamiltonian Formalism#Hamiltonian flows|transformation]] with parameter $\epsilon$ generated by a function $A(x,p)$ takes form:$$\Huge\begin{align}
x\rightarrow x'&=x+\epsilon\{x,A\}\\
p\rightarrow p'&=p+\epsilon\{p,A\}
\end{align}$$Where $\{x,A\}$ is the [[Hamiltonian Formalism#Poisson bracket|Poisson bracket]] between $x$ and $A$ given by:$$\Huge \{f,g\}=\frac{\partial f}{\partial x}\frac{\partial g}{\partial p}-\frac{\partial f}{\partial p}\frac{\partial g}{\partial x}$$In particular, the transformation generated by taking $A(x,p)=p$ is:$$\Huge\begin{align}
x\rightarrow x'&=x+\epsilon\{x,p\}=x+\epsilon\\
p\rightarrow p'&=p+\epsilon\{p,p\}=p
\end{align}$$So we see that the momentum $p$ generates an infinitesimal translation of $\epsilon$ in the wave function, $\psi(x)\rightarrow\psi(x-\epsilon)$.

# Momentum:

Consider a wave function $\psi(x)$ translated by an infinitesimal amount $\epsilon$ in the positive $x$ direction. We can then find the change in the wave function by [[Taylor series|Taylor expansion]]:$$\Huge \delta_\epsilon\psi(x)=\psi(x-\epsilon)-\psi(x)=-\epsilon\frac{\partial }{\partial x}\psi(x)+\mathcal{O}(\epsilon^2)$$This suggests that in order for momentum to generate translations, $p$ should be defined in terms of the derivative with respect to $x$. We therefore define the momentum operator:$$\Huge \hat p=-i\hbar\frac{\partial }{\partial x}$$Such that:$$\Huge \delta_\epsilon\psi(x)=-\epsilon\frac{i}{\hbar}\hat p\,\psi(x)$$Where $\hbar$ is some constant of proportionality. Since $p$ has units $MLT^{-1}$ and $\frac{\partial }{\partial x}$ has units $L^{-1}$, $\hbar$ must therefore be in units $ML^2T^{-1}$ or "energy time". Also since the wave function is complex, one could imagine $\hbar$ to be a complex number. However we will show that $\hbar$ has to be real in order to produce real momentum, hence the factor of $-i$ in the definition of the momentum operator. 

$\hbar$ is known as the reduced Planck's constant. In our universe, data suggests that:$$\Huge\hbar\approx1.05\times10^{-34}\text{kg m}^2\text{s}^{-1}$$This is very small, which is why quantum effects are not observed in day to day life.

# Commutation:

Since we defined the momentum operator, we also define the position operator:$$\Huge\hat x=x$$This simply multiplies an expression by position, $x$. The commutator of these operators is then defined as:$$\Huge [\hat x,\hat p]:=\hat x\hat p-\hat p\hat x$$We can apply this operator to the wave function to get:$$\Huge\begin{align}
[\hat x,\hat p]\psi(x)&=\hat x(\hat p\,\psi(x))-\hat p(\hat x\,\psi(x))\\
&=x\left(-i\hbar\frac{\partial }{\partial x}\psi(x)\right)+i\hbar\frac{\partial }{\partial x}(x\,\psi(x))\\
&=-i\hbar x\frac{\partial \psi}{\partial x}+i\hbar x\frac{\partial \psi}{\partial x}+i\hbar\,\psi(x)\\
&=i\hbar\,\psi(x)
\end{align}$$Since the wave function was general, we can write this result as the equivalence:$$\Huge [\hat x,\hat p]=i\hbar$$This is known as the canonical commutation relation.