
In classical mechanics, we saw that the [[Hamiltonian Formalism#Poisson bracket|Hamiltonian]] in the Poisson bracket was used to generate time translations. The equivalent in quantum mechanics can be thought of as an operator, similar to the [[Momentum and Planck's constant#Momentum|momentum operator]] that generates space translations. 

# Hamiltonian operator:

Consider a [[Wave function|wave function]] $\psi(x,t)$. The change in the wave function due to an infinitesimal time translation $t\rightarrow t+\epsilon$ is given by:$$\Huge \delta_\epsilon\psi(x,t)=\psi(x,t+\epsilon)-\psi(x,t)=\epsilon\frac{\partial \psi(x,t)}{\partial t}+\mathcal{O}(\epsilon^2)$$We require that this change is generated by the Hamiltonian operator $\hat H$. This means that the total change in the wave function is proportional to the action of $\hat H$:$$\Huge \delta_\epsilon\psi(x,t)=\frac{\epsilon}{\alpha}\hat H\psi(x,t)$$Where $\alpha\in\mathbb{C}$ is some unknown constant. We aim to determine this constant.

Firstly we look at the units of this constant. The Hamiltonian has units $ML^2T^{-2}$, while the derivative given by $\partial_t$ has units $T^{-1}$. Therefore $\alpha$ will have units $ML^2T^{-1}$, the same units as angular momentum and $\hbar$.

To determine if the constant is real or complex, we look at the conservation of total probability. This requires that the probability to find the particle in the whole space is always $1$. This requires $\int\overline{\psi(x,t)}\psi(x,t)dx$ is constant in time:$$\Huge\begin{align}
0&=\partial_t\int|\psi(x,t)|^2dx\\
&=\int\left(\frac{\partial }{\partial t}\psi^*\right)\psi dx+\int\psi^*\left(\frac{\partial }{\partial t}\psi\right)dx\\
&=\int\frac{1}{\alpha}(\hat H\psi)^*\psi dx+\int\psi^*\frac{1}{\alpha}\hat H\psi dx
\end{align}$$Often we see that the kinetic energy that appears in the Hamiltonian is given by $T=\frac{p^2}{2m}$, so we can compute the form of the Hamiltonian operator:$$\Huge \hat H=\frac{\hat p^2}{2m}+V(x)=(-i\hbar)^2\frac{1}{2m}\frac{\partial^2}{\partial x^2}+V(x)=-\frac{\hbar^2}{2m}\frac{\partial^2}{\partial x^2}+V(x)$$Inserting this into the expression above gives:$$\Huge\begin{align}
0&=-\frac{\hbar^2}{2m\alpha^*}\int\left(\frac{\partial^2}{\partial x^2}\psi^*\right)\psi dx-\frac{\hbar^2}{2m\alpha}\int\psi^*\left(\frac{\partial^2}{\partial x^2}\psi\right)dx\\
&=-\frac{\hbar^2}{2m}\left(\frac{1}{\alpha^*}+\frac{1}{\alpha}\right)\int\psi^*\frac{\partial^2}{\partial x^2}\psi dx\\
&=\frac{\alpha+\alpha^*}{|\alpha|^2}\int\psi^*\hat H\psi dx
\end{align}$$In order for this to hold true, we must have $\alpha=-\alpha^*$. This means that $\alpha$ is an imaginary number. These observations suggest that $\alpha=i\hbar$, allowing us to write the specific form of $\hat H$ explicitly as:$$\Huge i\hbar\frac{\partial \psi(x,t)}{\partial t}=\hat H\psi=-\frac{\hbar^2}{2m}\frac{\partial^2}{\partial x^2}\psi(x,t)+V(x)\psi(x,t)$$This is the Schrodinger equation. This is first order in $t$, second order in $x$ and linear in $\psi$.

As this is linear in $\psi$, the principle of superposition holds. That is, given two solutions $\psi_1,\psi_2$, any linear combination $a_1\psi_1(x,t)+a_2\psi_2(x,t)$ is also a solution with constants $a_1,a_2\in\mathbb{C}$.

# Plane waves:

One solution to the Schrodinger equation can be found by taking $V(x)=0$ for all $x$. This has form:$$\Huge \psi_p(x,t)=\frac{1}{\sqrt{2\pi\hbar}}e^{ipx/\hbar}e^{-iE(p)t/\hbar}$$Where $E(p)$ is some function of momentum. Note that for this function, total probability $\int|\psi_p(x,t)|^2dx$ diverges. Using the momentum operator on this function gives:$$\Huge \hat p\psi_p=-i\hbar\frac{\partial }{\partial x}\psi_p=-i\hbar\frac{\partial }{\partial x}\left(\frac{1}{\sqrt{2\pi\hbar}}e^{ipx/\hbar}e^{-iE(p)t/\hbar}\right)=p\psi_p$$Here, $\hat p$ is the operator and $p,\psi_p$ can be thought of as an eigenvalue and eigenfunction of that operator respectively.

Using the Hamiltonian operator gives:$$\Huge\begin{align} \hat H\psi_p&=i\hbar\frac{\partial }{\partial t}\psi_p=i\hbar\frac{\partial }{\partial t}\left(\frac{1}{\sqrt{2\pi\hbar}}e^{ipx/\hbar}e^{-iE(p)t/\hbar}\right)=E(p)\psi_p\\
&=-\frac{\hbar^2}{2m}\frac{\partial^2}{\partial x^2}\psi_p=\dots=\frac{p^2}{2m}\psi_p
\end{align}$$
Where we used a different form of the Hamiltonian operator on each line. Letting $E(p)=\frac{p^2}{2m}$ we get:$$\Huge i\hbar\frac{\partial \psi(x,t)}{\partial t}=-\frac{\hbar^2}{2m}\frac{\partial^2\psi(x,t)}{\partial x^2}$$This is a solution to the Schrodinger equation that corresponds to a plane wave solution for a free particle of mass $m$.

