
[[Lagrangians for classical mechanics#Ignorable coordinates and Conservation of momentum|Ignorable coordinates]] motivates the statement that a coordinate $q_i$ is ignorable if the [[Calculus of variations#Euler-Lagrange equations|Lagrangian]] is invariant under the transformation $q_i\mapsto q_i+\epsilon a_i$ with $\epsilon a_i$ an arbitrary constant shift. Whenever this happens, we observed that generalised momentum $p_i$ was conserved.

Consider a uniparametric family of smooth maps $\varphi(\epsilon):\mathcal{C}\mapsto\mathcal{C}$ from [[Calculus of variations#Configuration space and generalised coordinates|configuration space]] to itself, with the property that $\varphi(0)$ is the identity map. We call this family of maps a transformation depending on $\epsilon$. In any given coordinate system, we can write the transformation as:$$\Huge q_i\rightarrow\phi_i(q_1,\dots,q_N,\epsilon)$$With $\phi_i$ a set of $N:=\dim\mathcal{C}$ functions representing the finite transformation in the given coordinate system. We then take the change in velocities to be:$$\Huge \dot q_i\rightarrow \frac{d}{dt}\phi_i$$Note that this definition is not trivial, as $q_i$ and $\dot q_i$ are still treated as independent at the Lagrangian level. Often, the shorthand notation $q_i'=\phi_i(\underline q,\epsilon)$ is used, that is we write:$$\Huge q_i\rightarrow q_i'=\dots$$Where a function of $q_i,\epsilon$ has been omitted. 

The generator of $\varphi$ is defined as:$$\Huge \frac{d\varphi(\epsilon)}{d\epsilon}\vert_{\epsilon=0}:=\lim_{\epsilon\to 0}\frac{\varphi(\epsilon)-\varphi(0)}{\epsilon}$$In any given coordinate system we have:$$\Huge q_i\rightarrow \phi_i(\underline q,\epsilon)=q_i+ \epsilon a_i(\underline q)+\mathcal{O}(\epsilon^2)$$Where:$$\Huge a_i=\frac{\partial \phi_i(\underline q,\epsilon)}{\partial \epsilon}\vert_{\epsilon=0}$$The above is a function of the generalised coordinates, the generator for the transformation is therefore $a_i$ for such coordinate. Similarly, the velocities get transformed as follows:$$\Huge \dot q_i\rightarrow \dot q_i+ \epsilon\dot a_i(q_1,\dots,q_n,\dot q_1,\dots,\dot q_N)+\mathcal{O}(\epsilon^2)$$Generated by $\dot a_i$.


## Particle in $\Re^d$
Take a particle moving in $\Re^d$ with cartesian coordinates $x_i$ for example. We associate the transformation with the first coordinate, $x_i$. That is $x_1\rightarrow x_1+\epsilon$ with other coordinates constant. So we have that the shifts of the coordinate system in the $x_1$ direction are generated by:$$\Huge a_i=\begin{cases}1&\text{for }i=1\\0&\text{otherwise}\end{cases}$$And $\dot a_i=0$. 

## Particle rotating in $\Re^2$
Consider a particle moving in two dimensions, and consider the finite transformations given by rotations around the origin. This gives the transformation:$$\Huge x\rightarrow x\cos\epsilon-y\sin\epsilon,\,\,y\rightarrow x\sin\epsilon+y\cos\epsilon$$In order to find the generators, we derive the associated infinitesimal transformations by using the expansions $\sin(\epsilon)=\epsilon+\mathcal{O}(\epsilon^3)$ and $\cos(\epsilon)=1+\mathcal{O}(\epsilon^2)$. We then find:$$\Huge x\rightarrow x-y\epsilon+\mathcal{O}(\epsilon^2),\,\,y\rightarrow y+x\epsilon+\mathcal{O}(\epsilon^2)$$This implies that the transformation is generated in cartesian coordinates by:$$\Huge a_x=-y,\,a_y=x,\,\dot a_x=-\dot y,\,\dot a_y=\dot x$$
We propose that the equations of motion do not change if the Lagrangian is modified by the addition of the total derivative of a function of the coordinates and time. That is:$$\Huge L\rightarrow L+\frac{dF(\underline q,t)}{dt}$$Does not change the equations of motion generated by the Lagrangian. To prove this, we observe the effect on the action:$$\Huge S=\int_{t_0}^{t_1}L\,dt\rightarrow S'=S+F(q_1(t_1))$$