
Let $X$ be a [[Topological spaces#Topologies|topological space]]. A cover of $X$ is a collection $(U_i)_{i\in I}$ of subsets of $X$ with $\bigcup_{i\in I}U_i=X$. The cover is called an open cover if every $U_i$ is open. A subcover of $(U_i)_{i\in I}$ is a cover $(U_i)_{i\in J}$ where $J\subseteq I$. Such a subcover is called finite if $J$ is finite. A topological space $X$ is called compact if and only if every open cover of $X$ admits a finite subcover of $X$. A finite subcover is often written as:$$\Huge X=\bigcup_{k=1}^nU_{i_k}$$Note that to show that a space is not compact, an infinite cover $(U_i)_{i\in I}$ for $X$ such that for any finite $J\subseteq I$ with $\bigcup_{i\in J}U_i\neq X$ must be found:
> If $X$ is a finite set, then $X$ is compact. This is because if $|X|=n<\infty$ then the number of open sets $|\tau|\leq|\wp(X)|=2^n$ so any cover is also a finite cover.
> $\Re$ is not compact. Let $U_i=(i-1,i+1)$ for $i\in\mathbb{Z}$. Then $(U_i)_{i\in\mathbb{Z}}$ is an infinite open cover of $\Re$ but for any finite $J=\{i_1,\dots,i_n\}$, then $\max(J)+2\notin\bigcup_{k=1}^nU_{i_k}$.
> Let $X$ be an finite set with the topology $\tau=\{U\subset X:X\setminus U\text{ is finite}\}\cup\{\emptyset\}$. Then $X$ is compact. Suppose that $X=\bigcup_{i\in I}U_i$ with $U_i$ open and assume none of these are empty. Choose some $j\in I$ and consider $X\setminus U_j=\{p_1,\dots,p_n\}$. Each $p_k$ is in some set $U_{i_k}$ of the open cover, and:$$\Huge X=U_j\cup\{p_1,\dots,p_n\}\subseteq U_j\cup U_{i_1}\cup\dots\cup U_{i_n}\subseteq X$$So we have a finite subcover indeed.

Suppose $X$ is a topological space with $\mathcal{B}$ a [[Limits, Bases, and Products#Bases|basis]] for its topology. Then $X$ is compact if and only if for any cover $(B_i)_{i\in I}$ of basis sets from $\mathcal{B}$, there is an finite subcover $(B_i)_{i\in J}$ for some finite $J\subseteq I$.

The compactness of a subset $Y$ inside a topological space $X$ can also be considered. In this case we consider $Y$ with the subspace topology so that an open cover of $Y$ is a family $(U_i\cap Y)_{i\in I}$ where each $U_i$ is an open subset of $X$ and $Y=\bigcup_{i\in I}(U_i\cap Y)$. We can state this as a family of open sets $(U_i)_{i\in I}$ in $X$ is an open cover of $Y$ if $Y\subseteq_{i\in I}U_i$. This admits a finite subcover if there exists finite $J\subseteq I$ with $Y\subseteq\bigcup_{i\in J}U_i$.

In $\Re$ with the standard topology, the closed interval $[0,1]$ is compact. Let $(U_i)_{i\in I}$ be open sets in $\Re$ such that $[0,1]\subseteq\bigcup_{i\in I}U_i$ and assume that they are basis sets. We must show that in fact $[0,1]$ is covered by a finite subcollection $U_{i_1}\cup\dots\cup U_{i_n}$. The endpoints $0$ is in some $U_{i_0}=(x,y)$ with $x<0<y$. So $[0,y/2]$, part of the set $[0,1]$, is covered by this one $U_i$. Define:$$\Huge A=\{a\in[0,\infty):[0,a]\text{ is covered by a finite number of }U_i\}$$Then we have $y/2\in A$ so $A$ is not empty. Note that if $a\in A$ and $0<b<a$ then $b\in A$ as $[0,b]$ will be covered by the same finite open subcover as $[0,a]$. Therefore $A$ is an interval and $[0,y/2]\subseteq A$. If there is any $c\geq1$ in  $A$ then $1\in A$ and $[0,1]$ can be covered by a finite number of $U_i$. Otherwise $1$ is an upper bound for $A$ and so $A$ has a supremum. Letting $s=\sup A$ we have $0<y/2\leq s\leq 1$ which will lead to a contradiction as since $s\in[0,1]$ then $s$ is in some set $U_{i_s}=(s-\delta,s+\epsilon)$. Now since $s=\sup A$ and $A$ is an interval, there are points of $A$ arbitrarily close below it, in particular some $b\in A$ such that $b\in U_{i_s}$. Letting $U_{i_1},\dots,U_{i_n}$ be a finite subcover of $[0,b]$ we note that $U_{i_1},\dots,U_{i_n},U_{i_s}$ is a finite subcover of $[0,s+\epsilon/2]$. So $s+\epsilon/2\in A$ and $s$ was not the supremum of $A$. Therefore there is some $c\geq1$ in $A$ and $[0,1]$ is indeed compact.

If $f:X\rightarrow Y$ is continuous, and $X$ is compact, then $f(X)$ is compact. Let $f(X)\subseteq\bigcup_{i\in I}V_i$ with each $V_i$ open. Then:$$\Huge X=f^{-1}(f(X))\subseteq f^{-1}\left(\bigcup_{i\in I}V_i\right)=\bigcup_{i\in I}f^{-1}(V_i)\subseteq X$$and since $f$ is continuous (making $f^{-1}(V_i)$ open) this gives an open cover of $X$. Since $X$ is compact and there is a finite subcover, $X=\bigcup_{k=1}^nf^{-1}(V_{i_k})$ however:$$\Huge f(X)=f\left(\bigcup_{k=1}^nf^{-1}(V_{i_k})\right)=\bigcup_{k=1}^nf(f^{-1}(V_{i_k}))\subseteq\bigcup_{k=1}^nV_{i_k}$$Hence $f(X)$ is compact.

A closed subset $A$ of a compact space $X$ is compact. Let $A\subseteq U_{i\in I}U_i$ with each $U_i$ open in $X$. Then since $A$ is closed, $X\setminus A$ is open and $X=\bigcup_{i\in I}U_i\cup(X\setminus A)$ is an open cover of $X$. Since $X$ is compact there must be a finite subcover $X=\bigcup_{k=1}^n U_{i_k}\cup(X\setminus A)$, which implies that $A\subseteq\bigcup_{k=1}^n U_{i_k}$ as required.

A compact subset $A$ of a Hausdorff space $X$ is closed in $X$. To show that $A$ is closed we show that $X\setminus A$ is open. Fix some $p\in X\setminus A$. For each $q\in A$ by the Hausdorff property we have open sets $U_q,V_q$ with $p\in U_q,q\in V$ and $U_q\cap V_q=\emptyset$, so $U_q\subseteq X\setminus V_q$. Then $A=\bigcup_{q\in A}\{q\}\subseteq\bigcup_{q\in A}V_q$ and since $A$ is compact there is a finite subcover $\bigcup_{k=1}^nV_{q_k}$ for $A$. Now define $U^p=\bigcap_{k=1}^nU_{q_k}$ which will contain $p$ and as it is a finite intersection it must be open. Now:$$\Huge U^p=\bigcap_{k=1}^nU_{q_k}\subseteq\bigcap_{k=1}^n(X\setminus V_{q_k})=X\setminus\bigcup_{k=1}^nV_{q_k}\subseteq X\setminus A$$so $p\in U^p\subseteq X\setminus A$ and:$$\Huge X\setminus A=\bigcup_{p\in X\setminus A}\{p\}\subseteq\bigcup_{p\in X\setminus A}U^p\subseteq X\setminus A$$And so $X\setminus A$ us a union of open sets which is open.

If $X$ is compact, $Y$ is Hausdorff, and $f:X\rightarrow Y$ is a continuous bijection, then $f$ is a homeomorphism. It is sufficient to show that $f^{-1}$ is also continuous. To prove that, it is sufficient to show that if $A\subseteq X$ is closed then $(f^{-1})^{-1}(A)=f(A)$ is also closed. Since $A$ is closed in a compact space, it is compact. Then as $f$ is continuous, it preserves compactness and $f(A)$ is also compact. Now as $Y$ is Hausdorff and $f(A)$ is compact, it must be closed. This proves the theorem.

Let $X$ and $Y$ be compact spaces, then $X\times Y$ is compact. To prove this, we must start with an infinite open cover of $X\times Y$. We can assume that each set of the cover is a basis set for the product topology on $X\times Y$. Therefore we can let the cover be:$$\Huge X\times Y=\bigcup_{i\in I}(U_i\times V_i)$$for open sets $U_i\subseteq X,V_i\subseteq Y$. Now fix some $p\in X$ and recall that $\{p\}\times Y$ is homeomorphic to $Y$. So we must have that $\{p\}\times Y$ is compact. Clearly the above union is an open cover of $\{p\}\times Y$, so there must be a finite subcover. Let such subcover have finite index set $I_p\subseteq I$ so that:$$\Huge \{p\}\times Y\subseteq\bigcup_{i\in I_p}(U_i\times V_i)$$We can arrange that for every $i\in I_p$, we have $p\in$