
Let $X$ be a set and $\sim$ an equivalence relation on $X$. We define $X/\sim$ to be the set of equivalence classes of $\sim$. For $x\in X$ we write:$$\Huge [x]=\{y\in X:y\sim x\},\,\,X/\sim=\{[x]:x\in X\}$$We also define the surjective map:$$\Huge \pi:X\rightarrow X/\sim,\,\,x\mapsto[x]$$which takes elements of $x$ to their equivalence class. Take for example $X=\Re^3$ and define the equivalence relation $(x_1,y_1,z_1)\sim(x_2,y_2,z_2)\iff z_1=z_2$, then $[(a,b,c)]=\{(x,y,z)\in\Re^3:z=c\}$. The elements of $\Re^3/\sim$ are therefore the planes with constant $z$ coordinate, the horizontal planes. Therefore the map $\pi:\Re^3\rightarrow\Re^3/\sim$ sends any point to the horizonal plane it is in.

Suppose that $X$ is a [[Topological spaces#Topologies|topological space]] and $\sim$ is an equivalence relation on $X$. Then we give $X/\sim$ the quotient topology defined as:$$\Huge U\subseteq X/\sim\text{ is open}\iff \pi^{-1}(U)\text{ is open in }X$$We call $X/\sim$ with such topology a quotient space and the map $\pi$ a quotient map. We propose that this defines a topology on $X$.

The topology on $X/\sim$ is the largest such that $\pi$ is continuous. To prove this, note that the definition of a topology on $X/\sim$ ensures $\pi$ is continuous and that adding any extra open sets in $X/\sim$ would make $\pi$ discontinuous.

Suppose that $X$ is a space with equivalence relation $\sim$ and $Y$ is some other space. Then a map $f:X/\sim\rightarrow Y$ is continuous if and only if $f\circ\pi:X\rightarrow Y$ is continuous. Note that both $f,\pi$ are continuous, so $f\circ\pi$ is also continuous. To prove the converse, let $U\subseteq Y$ be open, then if $f\circ\pi$ is continuous we have $\pi^{-1}(f^{-1}(U))=(f\circ\pi)^{-1}(U)$ is open in $X$. Now by the definition of the topology on $X/\sim$ we have $f^{-1}(U)$ is open in $X/\sim$ as required.

Consider $\Re$ with its standard topology and the equivalence relation defined by $x\sim y\iff x-y\in\mathbb{Z}$. Then $\Re/\sim$ is [[Topological spaces#Homeomorphisms|homeomorphic]] to the circle $S^1$. This is the same as coiling an infinite rope into a circle. We start the proof by defining the map $\exp:\Re\rightarrow S^1\subseteq\mathbb{C}$ by $\exp(t)=e^{2\pi it}$. We look for a corresponding map $\overline\exp:\Re/\sim\rightarrow S^1$ defined as $\overline\exp([t])=\exp(t)$. We must first check that this is well defined:$$ [s]=[t]\iff s-t=k\in\mathbb{Z}\iff\overline\exp([s])=e^{2\pi is}=e^{2\pi i(k+t)}=e^{2\pi ik}e^{2\pi it}=e^{2\pi it}=\overline\exp([t])$$ 