# Trees:

A tree is simply defined as a connected, acyclic graph. That is, there exists a path between any two vertices in the graph, and said graph contains no cycles. A forest is then defined to be any acyclic graph, it follows that every connected component of a forest is itself a tree.

# Labelled Trees:

A labelled tree is a tree in which every vertex is assigned a unique integer from $1$ to $n$, where $n$ is the amount of vertices in the tree. Cayley's formula states that there are $n^{n-2}$ distinct labelled trees with $n$ vertices. We can prove this using Kirchoff's Matrix Tree Theorem:

Kirchoff's Matrix Tree Theorem states that given a simple labelled graph $G=(V,E)$ with vertices $V=\{v_1,\dots,v_n\}$, define the matrix $M=(m)_{ij}$:$$\Huge (m)_{ij}=\begin{cases}-1&\text{if }v_iv_j\in E\\0&\text{if }v_iv_j\notin E\\d_G(v_i)&\text{if }i=j\end{cases}$$Then the number of spanning trees of $G$ is any unsigned cofactor of $M$. We want to find the number of spanning trees with $n$ vertices, so applying this result to the complete graph $K_n$ will prove our result. So we construct $M$. Note that the degree of any vertex is $n-1$, and $v_iv_j$ is always an edge, since we are considering $K_n$:$$\Huge M=\begin{pmatrix}n-1&-1&\dots&-1\\-1&n-1&\dots&-1\\\vdots&\vdots&\ddots&\vdots\\-1&-1&\dots&n-1\end{pmatrix}$$Notice that for an undirected graph, this matrix is always symmetric. We will find the cofactor at $1,1$ for convenience:$$\Huge C_{11}(M)=\det(M_{(1,1)})$$Where $M_{(1,1)}$ is the matrix obtained by deleting the first row and column of $M$. This will be an $(n-1)\times(n-1)$ matrix, denoted as $M_1$. So the answer to our question is equal to $\det(M_1)$. Note that the elementary row operation $A_{rs}(\mu)$ does not change the determinant of a matrix, where $A_{rs}(\mu)$ represents multiplying row $r$ by $\mu$ and adding it to row $s$. This is because the determinant of the elementary matrix that represents this operation is $1$, so the determinant of the matrix after an arbitrary amount of these elementary row operations is: $\det(E_1E_2\dots E_nM_1)=\det(E_1)\dots\det(E_n)\det(M_1)=1\times\dots\times1\times\det(M_1)=\det(M_1)$, so we are free to manipulate $M_1$ in this way without changing its determinant. We choose elementary row operations of the form $A_{1\,i}(-1)$ for $i\in\{2,3,\dots,n-2,n-1\}$ so that our matrix is now of the form:
$$\Huge \begin{pmatrix}n-1&-1&-1&\dots&-1\\-1&n-1&-1&\dots&-1\\-1&-1&n-1&\dots&-1\\\vdots&\vdots&\vdots&\ddots&\vdots\\-1&-1&-1&\dots&n-1\end{pmatrix}\mapsto \begin{pmatrix}n-1&-1&-1&\dots&-1\\-n&n&0&\dots&0\\-n&0&n&\dots&0\\\vdots&\vdots&\vdots&\ddots&\vdots\\-n&0&0&\dots&n\end{pmatrix}$$
Similarly, the elementary column operation of similar form does not change the determinant by the same line of reasoning, so we perform $A_{i\,1}(1)$ for $i\in\{2,3,\dots,n-2,n-1\}$, adding each column $i$ to the first, multiplied by $1$:
$$\Huge \begin{pmatrix}n-1&-1&-1&\dots&-1\\-n&n&0&\dots&0\\-n&0&n&\dots&0\\\vdots&\vdots&\vdots&\ddots&\vdots\\-n&0&0&\dots&n\end{pmatrix}\mapsto\begin{pmatrix}1&-1&-1&\dots&-1\\0&n&0&\dots&0\\0&0&n&\dots&0\\\vdots&\vdots&\vdots&\ddots&\vdots\\0&0&0&\dots&n\end{pmatrix}$$
Denote this new matrix as $M_1'$. We have that $\det(M_1)=\det(M_1')$, so expand $M_1'$ along the first row. Notice that each $(M_1')_{(1,i)}$ for $i\in\{2,3,\dots,n-2,n-1\}$ contains a row of zeros, so expanding along this row shows that each of these have a determinant of zero. Therefore we only need to worry about the term at $1,1$, that is $(M_1')_{(1,1)}=M_2'$:$$\Huge \det(M_1)=1\times\det(M_2')$$Notice that $M_2'$ is simply $n$ times the $n-2$ dimensional identity matrix, so we have that:$$\Huge \det(M_1)=\det(nI_{n-2})=\det\begin{pmatrix}n&0&0&\dots&0\\0&n&0&\dots&0\\0&0&n&\dots&0\\\vdots&\vdots&\vdots&\ddots&\vdots\\0&0&0&\dots&n\end{pmatrix}$$This is simply equal to the product of the diagonal elements, that is:$$\Huge \det(M_1)=\prod_{i=1}^{n-2}nI_{n-2}=\prod_{i=1}^{n-2}n=n^{n-2}$$So we have proven the result as required, using Kirchoff's Matrix Tree theorem, that there indeed are $n^{n-2}$ distinct labelled trees with $n$ vertices.

# Spanning trees and MSTs:

The spanning tree of a graph is a subgraph that shares the same vertex set as the graph, which is also a tree. That is, every vertex in the graph is in the tree, the tree spans the graph. For any weighted graph, the minimum spanning tree (MST) is defined to be the spanning tree of least total weight. 

## Prim's Algorithm:
One way to find the MST of a weighted graph is through Prim's algorithm, the procedure of which is as follows:
> From any weighted, connected graph $G=(V,E,\Phi_G)$, choose a vertex $v_1\in V$ and include this in $T_1=(\{v_1,\emptyset\})$
> Find the edge of least weight in $G$ that connects any vertex in $T_k=(V_{T_k},E_{T_k})$ to a vertex not currently in $T_k$, but in $G$. That is the least weighted edge  $e\in E\setminus E_{T_k}$ such that $e=v_iv_j$ where $v_i\in V_{T_k}$ and $v_j\in V\setminus V_{T_k}$
> Add such edge, $e$, and such vertex $v_j$ to the tree to construct $T_{k+1}$
> Repeat the previous two steps until $V_{T_k}=V$

This algorithm naturally avoids creating cycles, since edges are only added if they connect a vertex in $T_k$ to a vertex not in $T_k$. Since this algorithm only terminates when $V_{T_k}=V$, both $G$ and $T$ share a vertex set, so the resulting tree must span.

Suppose that the tree produced by this algorithm, $T$, is not optimal and let $T'$ be the MST. Then we have $w(T)\geq w(T')$ and that there must exist some edge $e$ in $T$ that is not in $T'$ because if they shared the edge set they must be the same tree (since we know trees from Prim's algorithm span). Let $V_e$ be the set of vertices added before $e$ was added, then there must exist an edge $f$ in $T'$ that connects a vertex in $V_e$ to a vertex in $V\setminus V_e$. Form the tree $T''=T'-f+e$, that is the tree formed when replacing edge $f$ with edge $e$ in $T'$. Note that $w(f)\geq w(e)$ since $e$ was the edge used to make $T'$ optimal and $T$ not optimal. Therefore $T''$ is also an MST. So we have $w(T'')=w(T')-w(f)+w(e)\leq w(T')$, and since both are MSTs we must have $w(T'')=w(T')$. One can repeat this process for all edges in $T$ that are not in $T'$. Once this has been done for all of such edges, the tree "$T''$" is the same as $T$, giving the result $w(T)\leq\dots\leq w(T'')\leq w(T')$. This implies $w(T)\leq w(T')$, but since we have $w(T)\geq w(T')$, we can conclude $w(T)=w(T')$, therefore $T$ is indeed a minimum spanning tree.

## Kruskal's algorithm:

Another way to find the MST of a connected graph is by applying Kruskal's algorithm. The procedure for this algorithm is much simpler than Prim's with the only rule being:
> Add the edge of least weight that does not cause a cycle

This will terminate when it is not possible to add an edge without creating a cycle. Assume that the algorithm terminates without adding a vertex. Since the original graph was connected, there exists a path between any two vertices and therefore there must be a an edge connecting any vertex to the rest of the graph. That is, $d_G(e)\geq1$ for all $e\in E$. Since the algorithm terminated without adding a vertex, adding the edge that connects the vertex must create a cycle. In this scenario, the vertex would be connected to some other vertex in the tree, which is a contradiction. Therefore this process always produces a tree, since we have shown connectedness is preserved, and the algorithm preserves acyclicity by nature.