
Electrostatics concerns the study of [[Electromagnetism#Charges, currents, and fields|electric charges]] at rest. This means that nothing is time dependent and we take:$$\Huge \frac{\partial \underline E}{\partial t}=\frac{\partial \underline B}{\partial t}=0$$as well as $\underline J=0$, since no currents flow. To solve [[Electromagnetism#Maxwell's equations|Maxwell's equations]] we therefore set $\underline B=0$. This leaves only two equations remaining.

# Gauss' law:

The remaining equations therefore become:$$\Huge\begin{align}
\underline{\nabla}\cdot\underline E&=\frac{\rho}{\epsilon_0}\\
\underline{\nabla}\times\underline E&=0
\end{align}$$The problem then consists of solving for the electric field $\underline E$, given a charge density $\rho(\underline x)$ that sources it. Note that $\underline{\nabla}\times\underline E=0$ requires that the electric field is irrotational.

This first equation is known as Gauss' law. Integrating over a region $V$ gives:$$\Huge \int_V\underline{\nabla}\cdot\underline E\,dV=\frac{1}{\epsilon_0}\int_V\rho\,dV=\frac{Q}{\epsilon_0}$$where we define $Q$ as the total charge contained in the region $V$. Let $S$ be the boundary of the region, and apply the [[Integral theorems#Divergence theorem|divergence theorem]] to the first term to obtain:$$\Huge \int_S\underline E\cdot\underline{dS}=\frac{Q}{\epsilon_0}$$known as the integral form of Gauss' law. The LHS term is known as the flux of the electric field through the surface $S$, this law states that it must be equal to the total charge enclosed by the surface. Such surface is known as a Gaussian surface. Note that if the region only contains point charges, the region can be deformed and the integral will not change in value unless the deformation passes through a point charge.

Taking a point charge $q_1$ at the origin as an example, we can apply the integral form of Gauss' law. The electrical field must be radial in this case, taking the form $\underline E=E\hat{\underline r}$ where $\hat{\underline r}$ is the unit radial vector pointing outwards. Taking the Gaussian surface to be a sphere of radius $r$, the total charge inside the sphere must be $Q=q_1$ and for the sphere we have $\underline{dS}=dS\,\hat{\underline r}$, making Gauss' law take form:$$\Huge \frac{q_1}{\epsilon_0}\int_SE\hat{\underline r}\cdot\hat{\underline r}\,dS=\int_SE\,dS=E\int_SdS=4\pi r^2E$$using the result for the surface area of a sphere. this gives us:$$\Huge E=\frac{q_1}{4\pi\epsilon_0r^2}$$with $\underline E=E\hat{\underline r}$. Using the Lorentz force and the electric field for this point charge, we can calculate the force on another point charge $q_2$ at the position $\underline r$:$$\Huge \underline F=q_2\underline E=\frac{q_1q_2\hat{\underline r}}{4\pi\epsilon_0r^2}=\frac{q_1q_2\underline r}{4\pi\epsilon_0r^2}$$, known as Coulomb's law. If $q_1q_2>0$ then the force is directed away from the origin, otherwise it is direction towards the origin. 

Shifting the position of the charge $q_1$ from the origin to a position $\underline r_1$ and placing a charge $q_2$ at the position $\underline r_2$ we see that the force on $q_2$ due to $q_1$ is:$$\Huge \underline F=\frac{q_1q_2(\underline r_2-\underline r_1)}{4\pi\epsilon_0|\underline r_2-\underline r_1|^3}$$
# Electric fields from Gauss' law:

We can then calculate the electric field due to a charge density using a similar approach to a point charge. Consider an electric field due to a sphere centered at the origin with radius $R$ with uniform charge density $\rho$ throughout. First note that the total charge of the sphere is $q_1=\frac{4\pi R^3\rho}{3}$. The electric field will again be radial. We take the Gaussian surface to be the sphere of radius $r$, which gives the same result as previous.

If $r>R$ then all the charge $q_1$ is enclosed within $S$ and $Q=q_1$, which gives:$$\Huge E=\frac{q_1}{4\pi\epsilon_0r^2}=\frac{\rho R^3}{3\epsilon_0r^2}$$
	If $0\leq r\leq R$ then the total charge enclosed within $S$ is the volume of the ball of radius $r$ times the charge density given by $Q=\frac{4\pi r^3\rho}{3}$, by Gauss' law we have:$$\Huge 4\pi r^3E=\frac{4\pi r^3\rho}{3}\implies E=\frac{\rho r}{3\epsilon_0}$$The final result is then:$$\Huge E=\begin{cases}\frac{\rho r}{3\epsilon_0}&0\leq r\leq R\\\frac{\rho R^3}{3\epsilon_0r^2}&r>R\end{cases}$$
Now consider a radial but non-uniform charge density given by:$$\Huge \rho=\frac{q}{2\pi l^2r}e^{-r^2/l^2}$$for some positive constant $l$. The electric field is again radial with $\underline E=E(r)\hat{\underline r}$ where $E(r)$ is a function of only $r$. Take the Gaussian surface to be a sphere of radius $a$, then the flux of the electric field through $S$ is:$$\Huge \int_SE(a)\cdot\underline{dS}=4\pi a^3E(a)=\frac{Q}{\epsilon_0}$$where $Q$ is the total charge in the region $V$ with $\partial V=S$. We can calculate $Q$ using spherical polar coordinates with $dV=r^2\sin\theta\,dr\,d\theta\,d\varphi$:$$\Huge\begin{align}
Q&=\int_V\rho\,dV\\
&=4\pi\int_0^a\frac{q}{2\pi l^2r}e^{-r^2/l^2}r^2dr\\
&=\int_0^a\frac{2q}{l^2}re^{-r^2/l^2}dr\\
&=\left[-qe^{-r^2/l^2}\right]_0^a=q(1-e^{-a^2/l^2})
\end{align}$$Therefore:$$\Huge E(a)=\frac{q(1-e^{-a^2/l^2})}{4\pi a^2\epsilon_0}$$with $E(\underline r)=E(a)\hat{\underline r}$.

Considering an infinitesimally thin surface, we replace the charge per unit volume ($\rho$) with surface charge density ($\sigma$), charge per unit area. In this case $Q=\int_S\sigma\,dS$ gives the total charge of the surface $S$.

Considering the electric charge to lie on an infinitesimally thin line, we replace charge density $\rho$ with linear charge density $\lambda$, charge per unit length. In this case $Q=\int_0^l\lambda\,dl$ gives the total charge of the line with length $l$.

# Electric dipoles:

Since the equations of electrostatics are linear, the principle of superposition applies and the electric field for a charge density that is a sum of terms is simply the sum of the electric fields due to the individual terms. As an example we consider the electric dipole. This consists of a pair of oppositely charged point charges separated by a distance $h$. One charge $q$ is placed at the origin and the other $-q$ is placed at $r=-h$. Using the expression for the electric field of a point charge and the superposition principle, the electric field of the dipole is:$$\Huge \underline E=\frac{q}{4\pi\epsilon_0}\left(\frac{\underline r}{r^3}-\frac{(\underline r+\underline h)}{|\underline r+\underline h|^3}\right)$$where $\underline h$ is the vector from the origin to the negative charge. We use the fact that $h=|\underline h|$ is small to approximate using a Taylor series:$$\Huge |\underline r+\underline h|^{-3}=r^{-3}+(\underline h\cdot\underline{\nabla})r^{-3}+\mathcal{O}(h)$$[[Index notation]] can be used to evaluate the second term:$$\Huge (\underline h\cdot\underline{\nabla})r^{-3}=h_i\partial_ir^{-3}=h_ix_ir^{-1}\frac{d}{dr}r^{-3}=-3(\underline h\cdot\underline r)r^{-5}$$where we have used the chain rule to write the spatial derivative in terms of a radial derivative. Now we can write the electric field as:$$\Huge\begin{align}
\underline E&=\frac{q}{4\pi\epsilon_0}\left(\underline rr^{-3}-(\underline r+\underline h)(r^{-3}-3(\underline h\cdot\underline r)r^{-5}+\mathcal{O}(h)\right)\\
&=\frac{q}{4\pi\epsilon_0}(3\underline{\hat{r}}(\underline h\cdot\underline{\hat{r}})-\underline h+\mathcal{O}(h))r^{-3}
\end{align}$$The combination $\underline p=q\underline h$ is called the electric dipole moment. Considering the limit as $h\to0$ with $q\to\infty$ (so that $\underline p$ remains finite) results in the $\mathcal{O}(h)$ terms disappearing and gives the electric field of a dipole with dipole moment $\underline p$:$$\Huge \underline E=\frac{3(\underline p\cdot\underline{\hat{r}})\underline{\hat{r}}-\underline p}{4\pi\epsilon_0 r^3}$$Note that this is no longer radially symmetric and decays with $r^{-3}$ instead of $r^{-2}$. It is possible to combine two dipoles to make a quadrupole that decays with $r^{-4}$ and so on.