# Galilean boost:

A reference frame $\mathcal{R}$ is a spatial coordinate system and a time variable, measured at a fixed value of these spatial coordinates. $\mathcal{R}$ is called inertial if it is not accelerating, allowing for Newton's first law to hold. All inertial frames are either all at rest, or all in a uniform translation with respect to each other.

Let $\mathcal{R}$ and $\mathcal{R}'$ be two inertial frames such that $t=t'=0$, their origins coincide and their axes are aligned. If the origin of $\mathcal{R}'$ is moving along the positive $x$-axis with speed $v$ then the coordinates of $\mathcal{R}'$ and $\mathcal{R}$ are related by the formulae from classical mechanics:$$\Huge t'=t,\,\,x'=x-vt,\,\,y'=y,\,\,z'=z$$This is called a standard Galilean transformation or boost along the $x$-axis. "Standard" refers to the simple assumptions made about $\mathcal{R}$ and $\mathcal{R}'$. $\mathcal{R}'$ could have been rotated ($3$ parameters), translated ($3$ parameters), time not synchronised ($1$ parameter), or had any velocity $v$ ($3$ parameters). Therefore a general Galilean transformation contains $10$ parameters. This can be written in [[Matrix definition|matrix]] form as:$$\Huge\begin{pmatrix}t'\\x'\\y'\\z'\end{pmatrix}=\begin{pmatrix}1&0&0&0\\-v&1&0&0\\0&0&1&0\\0&0&0&1\end{pmatrix}\begin{pmatrix}t\\x\\y\\z\end{pmatrix}$$In the case described above, $y$ and $z$ are not important, so we can write:$$\Huge \begin{pmatrix}t'\\x'\end{pmatrix}=\begin{pmatrix}1&0\\-v&1\end{pmatrix}\begin{pmatrix}t\\x\end{pmatrix}=G(v)\begin{pmatrix}t\\x\end{pmatrix}$$Where $G(v)=\begin{pmatrix}1&0\\-v&1\end{pmatrix}$. Note that:$$\Huge (G(v))^{-1}=\begin{pmatrix}1&0\\v&1\end{pmatrix}=G(-v)$$So we can invert this transformation to give:$$\Huge \begin{pmatrix}t\\x\end{pmatrix}=\begin{pmatrix}1&0\\v&1\end{pmatrix}\begin{pmatrix}t'\\x'\end{pmatrix}=\begin{pmatrix}t'\\x'+vt'\end{pmatrix}$$This gives the result that from the point of view of an observer in $\mathcal{R}'$, the origin of $\mathcal{R}$ is moving along the negative $x'$ axis with speed $v$. 

Suppose that there is a frame $\mathcal{R}''$ moving at speed $u'$ along the positive $x'$ axis. Using the standard Galilean transformation we have:$$\Huge\begin{align}
\begin{pmatrix}t''\\x''\end{pmatrix}&=G(u')\begin{pmatrix}t'\\x'\end{pmatrix}=G(u')G(v)\begin{pmatrix}t\\x\end{pmatrix}\\
&=\begin{pmatrix}1&0\\-u'&1\end{pmatrix}\begin{pmatrix}1&0\\-v&1\end{pmatrix}\begin{pmatrix}t\\x\end{pmatrix}\\
&=\begin{pmatrix}1&0\\-u'-v&1\end{pmatrix}\begin{pmatrix}t\\x\end{pmatrix}\\
&=G(u'+v)\begin{pmatrix}t\\x\end{pmatrix}=G(u)\begin{pmatrix}t\\x\end{pmatrix}
\end{align}$$Where $u=u'+v$ is the speed at which the frame $\mathcal{R}''$ moves relative to $\mathcal{R}$. This corresponds to the standard velocity addition formula from classical mechanics.

# Lorentz boosts:

Suppose that the speed of light $c$ is measured in frame $\mathcal{R}$ and $c'$ in frame $\mathcal{R}'$, where $v$ is the relative motion between the two frames. By Galilean velocity addition $c=c'+v\neq c'$, which contradicts the fact that she speed of light is measured to be equal in all internal reference frames.

Maxwell showed that electric and magnetic fields obey:$$\Huge\left(\frac{1}{c^2}\frac{\partial^2}{\partial t^2}-\frac{\partial^2}{\partial x^2}-\frac{\partial^2}{\partial y^2}-\frac{\partial^2}{\partial z^2}\right)\psi=0$$Where the wave speed $c$ is the speed of light. However one can show that under a standard Galilean transformation, the wave equation does not transform to the expected result. This appears to violate the principle of relativity. Einstein's theory of special relativity resolved both dilemma and showed that the Galilean transformation is incorrect and cannot be used to relate $\mathcal{R}$ and $\mathcal{R}'$. Einstein's theory proposed two postulates:
> The principle of relativity (physical laws are the same in all inertial frames)
> The speed of light in a vacuum is the same in all inertial frames

With these assumptions we derive the transformation relating coordinates in $\mathcal{R}$ and $\mathcal{R}'$ that will replace the Galilean transformation. Consider a light source sitting at the origin in $\mathcal{R}$ that emits a pulse of light in all directions at $t=0$. The light then radiates outwards in an expanding sphere of radius $ct$. The equation of this spherical wavefront is given by:$$\Huge c^2t^2-(x^2+y^2+z^2)=0$$As the speed of light is the same in all inertial frames, then in $\mathcal{R}'$ the equations of the same wavefront must be given by:$$\Huge c^2t'^2-(x'^2+y'^2+z'^2)=0$$Therefore we require:$$\Huge c^2t^2-(x^2+y^2+z^2)= c^2t'^2-(x'^2+y'^2+z'^2)$$We take a general linear transformation of $x,t$ in the following way:$$\Huge t'=\alpha t+\beta x,\,\,x'=\gamma x+\delta t$$As the origin of $\mathcal{R}'$ is moving along the positive $x$-axis with speed $v$ relative to the origin of $\mathcal{R}$ we must have that $x'=0$ corresponds to $x=vt$, giving $\delta=-v\gamma$. The transformation therefore simplifies to:$$\Huge t'=\alpha t+\beta x,\,\,x'=\gamma(x-vt)$$Using these transformations we get:$$\Huge c^2t^2-x^2=c^2(\alpha^2t^2+2\alpha\beta tx+\beta^2x^2)-\gamma^2(x^2-2vtx+v^2t^2)$$Comparing coefficients gives:$$\Huge c^2\alpha^2=c^2+v^2\gamma^2,\,\,x^2\beta^2=\gamma^2-1,\,\,c^2\alpha\beta=-v\gamma^2$$Multiplying the first two equations and comparing coefficients with the square of the third gives:$$\Huge c^4\alpha^2\beta^2=(c^2+v^2\gamma^2)(\gamma^2-1)v^2\gamma^4\implies(c^2-v^2)\gamma^2=c^2$$Which has positive solution:$$\Huge \gamma=\frac{1}{\sqrt{1-\frac{v^2}{c^2}}}$$The positive solution is chosen so that $x$ and $x'$ axes point in the same direction. This expression is called the Lorentz factor. Note that for $v\neq0$ we have $\gamma>1$. Using this result, we find the other constants to be given by:$$\Huge \alpha=\sqrt{1+\frac{\gamma^2v^2}{c^2}}=\gamma,\,\,\beta=-\frac{v\gamma^2}{c^2\alpha}=-\frac{v\gamma}{c^2}$$This is known as the standard Lorentz transformation (SLT) or Lorentz boost along the $x$-axis. For $\gamma$ to be real we require $v<c$, in the limiting case as $v\to c$ we see that $\gamma\to\infty$. In the limit $v/c\to0$ we get that $\gamma\to1$ and the Lorentz transformation reduces to the Galilean transformation. In practice, the Galilean transformation is mostly sufficient as $c$ is much greater than any speed humans have seen. One can show that this Lorentz transformation correctly transforms the spherical wavefront of light.

# Time dilation and length contraction:

Consider a timer at rest in frame $\mathcal{R}'$ located at the origin. $x'=0$ such that the time between ticks is $T'$ as measured in $\mathcal{R}'$. To calculate the time $T$ between ticks measured in $\mathcal{R}$ we must use the SLT with $t'=T', x'=0, t=T$ to give:$$\Huge T=\gamma T'$$As $\gamma>1$ we find that $T>T'$. This stretching of time is known as time dilation, we find that all time is relative. Denoting the distance travelled by the timer in one tick as $X$, as measured in frame $\mathcal{R}$ in which the clock is moving, we find that $X=\gamma vT'=vT$. This confirms that the clock is moving with speed $v$ in the frame $\mathcal{R}$.

The frame in which an object is at rest is called the rest frame and the time interval measured in such a frame is called the proper time. Time dilation required that for a given interval, proper time is always less than time measured in any other inertial frame.

Take a spacecraft performing a rendezvous with a piece of debris at $0.8c$. The spaceman says that he will arrive in $3$ hours. Here, $v/c=4/5$ so we have $\gamma=1/\sqrt{1-(4/5)^2}=5/\sqrt{25-16}=5/3$. The time in the spaceman's rest frame is $3$ hours, so the time in the frame of the debris is $3\gamma=5$. Therefore, from the point of view of the debris, the spaceman arrives in $5$ hours.

Let $\mathcal{R}$ be the rest frame of a rod that lies along the positive $x$-axis, with one end at the origin. The rod has length $l$ when measured in $\mathcal{R}$. The ends of the rod are given by $x_A=0,x_B=l$. Consider these ends in the frame $\mathcal{R}'$, using the SLT we have:$$\Huge t'=\gamma\left(t-\frac{vx_A}{c^2}\right)=\gamma t,\,\,x_A'=\gamma(x_A-vt)=-\gamma vt=-vt'$$The second result confirms that this end of the rod moves along the negative $x'$-axis with speed $v$ in the frame $\mathcal{R}'$. Similarly, the other end gives:$$\Huge t'=\gamma\left(t-\frac{vx_B}{c^2}\right)=\gamma\left(t-\frac{vl}{c^2}\right),\,\,x_B'=\gamma(x_B-vt)=\gamma(l-vt)$$We see that $\gamma t=t'+\frac{\gamma vl}{c^2}$, substituting this into $x_B'$ gives:$$\Huge x_B'=\gamma l-v\left(t'+\frac{\gamma vl}{c^2}\right)=-vt'+\gamma l\left(1-\frac{v^2}{c^2}\right)=-vt'+\frac{l}{\gamma}$$The length of the rod as measured in $\mathcal{R}'$ is $l'$, given by:$$\Huge l'=x_B'-x_A'=-vt'+\frac{l}{\gamma}+vt'=\frac{l}{\gamma}$$Now since $\gamma>1$ we  have that:$$\Huge l'=\frac{l}{\gamma}<l$$We see that the rod is shortened. This is called length contraction. The length of an object measured in the rest frame is called its proper length. This means that proper length is always greater than length measured in any other inertial frame. Note that this only applies in the direction of relative motion.

One application of length contraction is the study of muons. These are unstable subatomic particles, created by cosmic rays striking the atmosphere. Relativistic effects are required to explain how these muons are able to reach the ground, as muons typically have a lifespan of $2\times10^{-6}$ when measured in rest and are created $2$km above the group, travelling vertically downwards with speed $v=0.98c$. Without relativistic effects, the average distance a muon could travel is:$$\Huge \text{lifetime}\times 0.98\times c\approx600m<<2000m$$So this muon should not be detected at the group and decay at $1.4$km altitude. For speeds near to the speed of light we have $v/c=1-\epsilon$:$$\Huge \gamma=\frac{1}{\sqrt{1-\frac{v^2}{c^2}}}=\frac{1}{\sqrt{1-(1-\epsilon)^2}}\approx\frac{1}{\sqrt{2\epsilon}}$$In this example, $\epsilon=2\times10^{-2}$ with corresponding Lorentz factor:$$\Huge \gamma\approx\frac{1}{\sqrt{2\times2\times10^{-2}}}=\frac{10}{2}=5$$Due to time dilation, the lifetime of the muon is measured to be:$$\Huge \gamma\times2\times10^{-6}=5\times2\times10^{-6}=10^{-5}s$$In the rest frame. During this time, the muon can travel a distance given by:$$\Huge 10^{-5}\times0.98\times  c\approx3000m>2000m$$So the muon reaches the ground and is detected.