Inference is drawing conclusions from facts, data, and premises.

# Sample mean as an estimator:

Assume there is a population of interest with mean value $\mu$ and standard deviation $\sigma$. A simple random sample of size $n$ is taken such that $n$ is sufficiently large to call successive samples independent. Label each such sample $X_1,\dots,X_n$. Before their values are seen, each $X_i$ is a random variable with expectation $\mu$ and standard deviation $\sigma$. We then define the sample mean:$$\Huge \bar X=\frac{1}{n}\sum_{i=1}^nX_i$$This has the following properties:$$\Huge E[\bar X]=E\left[\frac{1}{n}\sum_{i=1}^nX_i\right]=\frac{1}{n}\sum_{i=1}^nE[X_i]=\frac{1}{n}\times n\mu=\mu$$$$\Huge Var[\bar X]=Var\left[\frac{1}{n}\sum_{i=1}^nX_i\right]=\frac{1}{n^2}\sum_{i=1}^nVar[X_i]=\frac{1}{n}\times n\sigma^2=\frac{\sigma^2}{n}$$This implies $\bar X$ is an [[Random sampling and proportions#Sample proportion as an estimator|unbiased estimator]] and that the variance of $\bar X$ is dependent on $n$. If the population of $X_i$ is normally distributed: $$\Huge X_i\sim N(\mu,\sigma^2)\implies\bar X\sim N\left(\mu,\frac{\sigma^2}{n}\right)$$$\bar X$ is still random before all $X_i$ are measured. Once measured, $X_i$ becomes $x_i$ and $\bar X$ becomes $\bar x$. The Frequentist view is that the population nis true but unknown and the only randomness comes from the random sampling. 

# The central limit theorem:

The above works well, however the population distribution is not always normal, so we suppose the following. Let $X_1,\dots,X_n$ be $n$ identically distributed independent variables, each with mean $\mu$ and standard deviation $\sigma$. Then we can say that the distribution of the sample mean satisfies:$$\Huge \bar X\to N\left(\mu,\frac{\sigma^2}{n}\right)\,\,\text{as}\,\,n\to\infty$$This is true regardless of the population distribution. 

# Standard errors and the $t$ distribution:

Often $\sigma$ is not known, so we need to estimate it sometimes. Before the data is measured, this is the random variable $S$:$$\Huge S=\sqrt{\frac{1}{n-1}\sum_{i=1}^n(X_i-\bar X)^2}=\sqrt{\frac{1}{n-1}\left(\sum_{i=1}^nX_i^2-n\bar X^2\right)}$$Under certain conditions, $E[S^2]=\sigma^2$ and is hence an unbiased estimator, dependent on the $\frac{1}{n-1}$ term rather than the $\frac{1}{n}$ term. Therefore we estimate the standard deviation of the sample mean $\frac{\sigma}{\sqrt{n}}$ by the standar