
# Cyclic groups:

A [[Basics of groups|group]] that can be [[Basics of groups#Generators and orders|generated]] by a single element is called cyclic. For example take any integer $n>0$, then the group $(\mathbb{Z}/n,+)$ is a cyclic group. It is generated by $\bar 1,-\bar 1$, or any $\bar m$ where [[Divisibility in a ring|$\gcd$]]$(m,n)=1$. Note that the $k$th power of $g\in G$ refers to the $k$th multiple when $+$ is the group operator.

Consider the subset $C_n=\{e^{k\frac{2\pi i}{n}}:k\in\mathbb{Z}\}$ for $n>0$. This is a cyclic group with generator $e^{\frac{2\pi i}{n}}$ that is a subgroup of $(\mathbb{C}^*,\cdot)$. The group $(\mathbb{Z},+)$ is considered an infinite cyclic group. This is because it's generators $1$ or $-1$ have no finite [[Basics of groups#Generators and orders|order]].

Note that for any $g\in G$ where $G$ is a group generates a subgroup $\langle g\rangle$.

We propose that a cyclic group is abelian. This is because any element in a cyclic group $G=\langle g\rangle$ has the form $g^k$ for some $k\in\mathbb{Z}$. Then $g^kg^l=g^{k+l}=g^lg^k$, making the group abelian.

If the order if a group $G$ is prime, then $G$ must be cyclic. Let $g\in G$ that generates the subgroup $\langle g\rangle<G$. If $g\neq e$ then it generates a subgroup of order $|\langle g\rangle|>1$. By [[Basics of groups#Cosets and Lagrange's theorem|Lagrange's theorem]] we know $|\langle g\rangle|$ divides $|G|=p$. Since $p$ is prime, and $|\langle g\rangle||p$ then $|\langle g\rangle|$ must either be $p$ or $1$. We have shown that if $g\neq e$ then $|\langle g\rangle|>1$, so $|\langle g\rangle|=p$. The two sets must therefore be the same, as $|\langle g\rangle|<G$ and they have the same cardinality. Since $\langle g\rangle$ is cyclic, $G$ is also cyclic.

# Permutation groups:

A permutation of a non-empty set $X$ is a bijection from $X$ to itself. We say:$$\Huge S_X=\{\text{bijections}:X\rightarrow X\}$$We use the shorthand for $n\geq1$:$$\Huge S_n:=S_{\{1,\dots,n\}}$$
We propose that $(S_X,\circ)$, where $\circ$ represents the composition of functions, is a group. $\circ$ is indeed a binary operation and the composition of bijections must also be a bijection. By definition, inverses of bijective functions in $S_X$ exist. Associativity is induced by composition of functions and can be shown rigorously (beyond the scope of these notes). The identity element is given by the "identity bijection" given by $f:X\mapsto X$ with $f(X)=X$ and $f^{-1}(X)=X$.

We propose that $|S_n|=n!$ for any $n\geq1$. There are $n$ possible bijections $\phi_1:1\mapsto\text{some element in }\{1,\dots,n\}$, then $n-1$ possible bijections for $\phi_2:2\mapsto\text{some element in }\{1,\dots,n\}$. This repeats down to $\phi_n$ and we see that there are $n\cdot(n-1)\cdot(n-2)\cdot\dots\cdot 1=n!$ choices.

A permutation $\beta$ of $\{1,2,3\}$ given by $\beta(1)=3,\beta(2)=1,\beta(3)=2$ can be written in shorthand as $\begin{pmatrix}1&2&3\\3&1&2\end{pmatrix}$. One can see that $\beta^3=\beta\circ\beta\circ\beta=e$, the identity bijection. Therefore the order of $\beta$ in $S_3$ is $3$.

## k-cycles, transposition:
Specific permutations in $S_n$ are cycles of length $k$ ($k$-cycles) for $1\leq k\leq n$, which are bijections for a given subset $\{i_1,\dots,i_k\}$ of size $k$ of $\{1,\dots,n\}$ as follows:$$\Huge \sigma(i_1)=i_2,\,\,\sigma(i_2)=i_3,\dots,\sigma(i_{k-1})=i_k,\,\,\sigma(i_k)=i_1$$Where all other elements in $\{1,\dots,n\}\setminus\{i_1,\dots,i_k\}$ are left fixed. We write such a $k$-cycle as:$$\Huge\begin{pmatrix}i_1&i_2&\dots&i_k\\i_2&i_3&\dots&i_1\end{pmatrix}$$Or as $(i_1\,i_2\,\dots\,i_k)$. Cycles of length $2$ (of the form $(i_1\,i_2)$) are called transpositions. One can show that the permutation $(i_1\,\dots\,i_k)$ has order $k$.

## Orbits:
A permutation $\sigma$ of $X$ determines in a natural way, a partition of $X$ into disjoint subsets, called the orbits of $\sigma$. This is done with an equivalence relation defined as:$$\Huge a\sim b\iff b=\sigma^n(a)$$for some $n\in\mathbb{Z}$. Equivalence classes are disjoint.

# Permutation multiplication:

Two cycles are called disjoint if their members do not intersect. For example $(1\,3\,5)$ and $(2\,4)$ are disjoint cycles, whereas $(1\,3\,5)$ and $(1\,2\,4)$ are not.

Bijections of two disjoint subsets of a given set do not affect each other, so we say that disjoint cycles commute with each other.

$\beta:\{1,\dots,n\}\rightarrow\{1,\dots,n\}$ is subdivided into bijections of subsets. We say that every permutation is a product of disjoint cycles, in an essentially unique way. For example:$$\Huge\begin{pmatrix}1&2&3&4&5&6&7&8&9&10\\5&3&2&1&4&8&9&7&6&10\end{pmatrix}=(1\,5\,4)\circ(2\,3)\circ(7\,9\,6\,8)\circ(10)$$This could also be written with the compositions in any other order, they commute with each other

# Cycle composition:

Let $\sigma,\tau:\{1,\dots,5\}\rightarrow\{1,\dots,5\}$ given by:$$\Huge \sigma=\begin{pmatrix}1&2&3&4&5\\4&3&1&5&2\end{pmatrix},\,\,\tau=\begin{pmatrix}1&2&3&4&5\\2&3&4&1&5\end{pmatrix}$$The composition of these permutations, $\sigma\circ\tau$, can be found by first applying $\tau$, then applying $\sigma$:$$\Huge \sigma\circ\tau=\begin{pmatrix}1&2&3&4&5\\3&1&5&4&2\end{pmatrix}$$For the first column, $1$ is sent to $2$ by $\tau$, which is sent to $3$ by $\sigma$. Typically, $1$-cycles and $\circ$ are omitted.

Note that a cycle can be written as a product of transpositions:$$\Huge (i_1\,i_2\,\dots\,i_k)=(i_1\,i_2)(i_2\,i_3)\dots(i_{k-1}\,i_k)$$
## Conjugate elements:
Two elements $g,g'\in G$ are called conjugate in $G$ to each other if there is an $h\in G$ such that $hgh^{-1}=g'$. Any conjugate of a transposition is again a transposition.

To prove this, observe that any permutation is a product of transposition. We therefore aim to reduce to conjugacy by a transposition, that is $(a\,b)$ is conjugated by $(c\,d)$. There are then three cases:
> $\{a,b\}\cap\{c,d\}=\emptyset$, then the cycles commute and $(c\,d)(a\,b)(c\,d)^{-1}=(a\,b)e=(a\,b)$
> $|\{a,b\}\cap\{c,d\}|=1$, so WLOG let $b=c$. Then $(b\,d)(a\,b)(b\,d)^{-1}=\begin{pmatrix}a&b&d\\d&b&a\end{pmatrix}=(a\,d)$.
> $|\{a,b\}\cap\{c,d\}|=2$, then $(a\,b)(a\,b)(a\,b)^{-1}=(a\,b)$.

We see in all cases, the transposition is sent to another transposition and we get the statement as required.

# The sign of a permutation:

The parity of the number of transpositions needed in any factorisation of $\sigma\in S_n$ is the same. In particular, the remainder of this number when divided by $2$ is well defined. To prove this, suppose that there exists an element $\sigma\in S_n$ that decomposes into both an even number $\sigma=\tau_1\dots\tau_{2n}$ and an odd number $\sigma=\tau_1'\dots\tau_{2m+1}'$ for $m,n\in\mathbb{Z}$ where all $\tau_i,\tau_j'$ are transpositions. Then $e=\sigma\sigma^{-1}=\tau_1\dots\tau_{2n}\cdot(\tau_1'\dots\tau_{2m+1}')^{-1}$, and since $(ab)^{-1}=b^{-1}a^{-1}$ for $a,b\in G$ we have $e=\tau_1\dots\tau_{2n}\cdot(\tau_{2m+1}'^{-1}\dots\tau_{1}'^{-1})$. That is, $e$ is a product of an odd number of transpositions. Suppose that $e=\sigma_1\dots\sigma_{2m+1}$ for some $m\geq0$ where each $\sigma_i$ are transpositions. Suppose also that $m$ is minimal. Then we have $m>0$ as $e$ is not a transposition itself. Up to relabeling, assume that $\sigma_1=(1\,2)$ and that the first $l$ transpositions $\sigma_1,\dots,\sigma_l$ all contain an index $1$, while the remaining ones ($\sigma_{l+1},\dots,\sigma_{2m+1}$) do not. Then if $a,b,c\in\{2,\dots,n\}$ are all mutually different, we can write $(a\,b)(c\,1)=(c\,1)(a\,b)$ as these are disjoint cycles. Note that is $c=b$ we have $(a\,b)(b\,1)=(1\,a)(a\,b)$ and the transposition containing the $1$ can still be commuted to the left. In this way, each $\sigma_1(1\,a_1),\dots,\sigma_l=(1\,a_l)$, cannot all be mutually different. If they were, we could write an $l+1$ cycle as $(1\,a_l\,\dots\,a_1)$ that does not fix $1$, which is a contradiction. Therefore we can assume some $a_i=a_j$ for $1\leq i\leq j\leq l$. We can then write:$$\large \tau_1\dots\tau_l=(1\,a_1)\dots(1\,a_{i-1})(1\,a_i)(1\,a_{i+1})\dots(1\,a_{j-1})(1\,a_j)(1\,a_{j+1})\dots(1\,a_l)$$Now we insert $e=(1\,a_i)(1\,a_i)$ into each slot between $i+1$ and $j-1$, that is between each successive $(1\,a_k)$ for $i+1\leq k\leq j-1$. Now we can reduce each triple transposition, showing that $m$ was not minimal. This is a contradiction, so we prove the statement.

An element with disjoint cycles of lengths $k_1,\dots,k_m$ has order $\text{lcm}(k_1,\dots,k_m)$.

The sign of a permutation $\sigma\in S_n$ is defined as:$$\Huge \text{sgn}(\sigma)=(-1)^t$$Where $t$ denotes the number of transpositions needed in a factorisation of $\sigma$. Note that any transposition has sign of $-1$. A $k$-cycle can be written as $k-1$ transpositions, so has sign of $(-1)^{k-1}$. Note that the $\text{sgn}$ function is multiplicative, that is $\text{sgn}(\sigma_1\sigma_2)=\text{sgn}(\sigma_1)\text{sgn}(\sigma_2)$.

We can then define the alternating group $A_n$ as the subgroup of even permutations in $S_n$. We check that this is indeed a group:
> $e\in A_n$ since $e=(1\,2)(1\,2)$, an even permutation
> $g,h\in A_n$ then by multiplicity of the $\text{sgn}$ we have that $gh\in A_n$
> For $g\in A_n$ we have that $g^{-1}\in A_n$, the inverse transposition

We propose that $|A_n|=\frac{n!}{2}$. Clearly the composition of an even and an odd permutation is an odd permutation, so multiplication by a transposition gives a bijection. Therefore there are as many even transpositions as odd transpositions, so $|A_n|=\frac{1}{2}|S_n|=\frac{n!}{2}$.

We propose that $A_n$ is [[Basics of groups#Normal subgroups|normal]] in $S_n$. There are only two left cosets wrt to $A_n$ in $S_n$. One of which is $eA_n=A_ne=A_n$, the trivial coset. The other coset is therefore formed by $S_n-A_n$. Both left and right imply that $A_n\lhd S_n$.

We propose that $A_n$ is generated by $3$-cycles. Any $\sigma\in A_n$ is written as a product of an even number of transpositions:$$\Huge \sigma=(a_1\,a_2)(a_3\,a_4)\dots(a_{2r-1}\,a_{2r})$$Observe that any $3$-cycles lies in $A_n$ as a $3$-cycle will have sign $(-1)^{3-1}=1$, making it a member of $A_n$. Any $\sigma\in A_n$ can be subdivided into successive pairs of transpositions so we write each such pair as a product of $3$-cycles:
> $a_3=a_1,a_4=a_2\implies\sigma=(a_1\,a_2)(a_1\,a_2)=e=(a_1\,a_2\,a_3)$
> $a_3=a_2\implies\sigma=(a_1\,a_2)(a_2\,a_4)=(a_1\,a_2\,a_4)$
> $a_1\neq a_2\neq a_3\neq a_4\implies\sigma=(a_1\,a_2)(a_3\,a_4)$. We work by inserting the identity in the form $e=(a_2\,a_3)(a_2\,a_3)$, making the permutation $(a_1\,a_2)(a_2\,a_3)(a_2\,a_3)(a_3\,a_4)=(a_1\,a_2\,a_3)(a_2\,a_3\,a_4)$

In each case we have decomposed $\sigma$ into a product of $3$-cycles, proving the statement.

# Dihedral groups:

For $n\geq3$ there are precisely $2n$ isometries of the plane which preserve a regular $n$-gon, such isometries form a group called the Dihedral group, $D_n$.

Note that $D_n$ is a subgroup of matrices in $GL_2(\Re)$ such that:$$\Huge \begin{pmatrix}\cos(\frac{2\pi k}{n})&\mp\sin(\frac{2\pi k}{n})\\\sin(\frac{2\pi k}{n})&\pm\cos(\frac{2\pi k}{n})\end{pmatrix},\,\,0\leq k\leq n-1$$Note if $n$ is odd, each vertex is opposite to a midpoint and each midpoint is opposite to a vertex. If $n$ is even, each vertex is opposite to a vertex and each midpoint is opposite to a midpoint.

Let $n\geq2$. Then we define $D_n$ as the group with two generators $r,s$ subject to the relations:
> $srs^{-1}=r^{-1}$
> $r^n=e$
> $s^2=e$

We write:$$\Huge D_n=\langle r,s:r^n=e,\,s^2=e,\,srs^{-1}=r^{-1}\rangle$$
Each element in $D_n$ can be written as $r^js^k$ with $0\leq j<n$ and $0\leq k\leq 1$. To prove this, notice that any $\sigma\in \langle r,s\rangle$ has the form $r^{a_1}s^{b_1}\dots r^{a_k}s^{b_k}$ for each $a_i,b_j\in\mathbb{Z}$. We claim that $sr^a=r^{-a}s$, which follows from the fact $srs^{-1}=r^{-1}\implies sr=r^{-1}s$ then $(srs^{-1})^a=s^ar^as^{-a}$. If $a=2m-1$ then $s^ar^as^{-a}=s^{2m-1}r^as^{1-2m}=(s^2)^ms^{-1}r^as^1(s^2)^{-m}=s^{-1}r^as$, if $a=2m$ then $s^ar^as^{-a}=s^{2m}r^as^{-2m}=(s^2)^mr^a(s^2)^{-m}=r^a$. Therefore $(srs^{-1})^a=sr^as^{-1}=r^{-a}$, which implies $sr^a=r^{-a}s$ as required. Now each power of each generator can be shifted to the left or right to make $\sigma$ of form $r^js^k$ as required. 

