# Forcing:

An external forcing term can be added to a [[Energy and oscillations#Simple Harmonic Oscillator|harmonic oscillator]], for example the vibration experience when driving over a corrugated surface:$$\Huge m\ddot x=-kx+m\sin(pt)$$For some positive constant $p$. Solving this gives:$$\Huge \ddot x+\omega^2x=\sin(pt)\implies x(t)=A\cos(\omega t)+B\sin(\omega t)+P(x)$$Where $P(x)$ is the particular integral. This takes form $C\sin(pt)$. Solving for $C$ gives:$$\Huge x(t)=A\cos(\omega t)+B\sin(\omega t)+\frac{1}{\omega^2-p^2}\sin(pt)$$This produces a mixture of oscillations of frequency $\omega$ and $p$. 

# Resonance:

If $\omega=p$, then the complimentary function remains the same however a different particular integral is needed. In this case:$$\Huge x(t)=A\cos(\omega t)+\left(B-\frac{t}{2\omega}\right)\sin(\omega t)$$The amplitude of oscillation then becomes:$$\Huge \sqrt{A^2+\left(B-\frac{t}{2\omega}\right)^2}$$This grows unbounded with $t$, which is very useful for tuning into a particular radio frequency however detrimental when building a bridge.

# Forcing + [[Energy and oscillations#Damped oscillators|Damping]]:

Adding a damping force can often give $x_{CF}$ that will tend to $0$ as $t\to\infty$, for example exponentials with negative powers. In this case, $x_{CF}$ is said to by the transient response. If the non-homogenous side of the second order [[Second Order Differential Equations#Inhomogeneous case, $ phi(x) neq 0$|ODE]] is periodic, then it will not tend to $0$ and is said to be the steady-state response. If this $x_{PI}$ is a linear combination of $\cos$ and $\sin$ terms, then it can be written as a single term using a phase shift. By defining $\tan\phi=\frac{2bp}{\omega^2-p^2}$ then $x_{PI}$ is written as:$$\Huge x_{PI}(t)=C\sin(pt-\phi)$$Note that resonance will now be out of phase with applied force, so cannot happen.

# Small oscillations:

Suppose that we are dealing with a conservative force and [[Energy and oscillations#Motion in Potential|$V(x)$]] has a local minimum at $x_0$. $V^\prime(x_0)=0$, so $x_0$ is an equilibrium point. If $V''(x_0)<0$ then $x_0$ is a stable equilibrium, if $V''(x_0)>0$ then $x_0$ is an unstable equilibrium. Small oscillations around a stable equilibrium can be approximated. Given a stable equilibrium point $x_0$, we can approximate $x(t)$ by:$$\Huge x(t)=x_0+\epsilon(t)$$Where $\epsilon(t)$ is a small function. Then the equation of motion becomes:$$\Huge m\ddot x=F(x)\implies m\ddot\epsilon=F(x_0+\epsilon)=F(x_0)+\epsilon F'(x_0)+\dots$$Using a [[Taylor series#Taylor polynomials|Taylor expansion]]. The increasing powers of $\epsilon$ become very small very quickly and note $F(x_0)=0$, so we write:$$\Huge m\ddot\epsilon\approx\epsilon F'(x_0)=-\epsilon V''(x_0)$$This is a simple harmonic oscillator for the function $\epsilon(t)$, provided that $V''(x_0)>0$. Then $V''(x_0)$ can be thought of as the spring constant in this oscillator. We can therefore determine the period of oscillation about this stable equilibrium:$$\Huge P=\frac{2\pi }{\omega}=\frac{2\pi}{\sqrt{V''(x_0)/m}}$$