
A string lies on the $x$-axis under tension. It has mass per unit length of $\rho$. Consider a short segment of the string, running from $x$ to $x+\delta x$. Make a transverse displacement of the string such that it is "plucked". This displacement is described by $u(t,x)$. Then define $\theta$ as the angle that the line segment between the point on the string at $x$ and at $x+\delta x$ makes with horizontal, such that $\theta$ and $\delta u$ are small. The equation of motion becomes:$$\Huge (\rho\,\delta x)\frac{\partial^2u}{\partial t^2}=T\sin\theta(x+\delta x)-T\sin\theta\,x$$Where $T$ is the constant tension in the string. Note that since $\theta$ is small, horizontal components of force along the line segment will cancel as $T\cos\theta\approx T$. This is not that useful in terms of $\theta$ so we work to express $\theta$ in terms of $u$. Considering the triangle made between the point at $x$ and $x+\delta x$, we can see that:$$\Huge \tan\theta=\frac{\delta u}{\delta x}\approx \sin\theta$$Since we are considering small $\theta$. Putting these together we get:$$\Huge \rho\frac{\partial ^2u}{\partial t^2}=T\frac{1}{\delta x}[\frac{\delta u}{\delta x}(x+\delta x)-\frac{\delta u}{\delta x}x]$$Now taking $\delta x\to 0$. Note that $\lim_{\delta x\to 0}\frac{1}{\delta x}(g(x+ \delta x)-g(x))=\frac{\partial g}{\partial x}$, so we get:$$\Huge \rho\frac{\partial^2u}{\partial t^2}=T\frac{\partial^2u}{\partial x^2}\implies \frac{\partial ^2u}{\partial t^2}=c^2\frac{\partial^2u}{\partial x^2}$$Where $c=\sqrt{\frac{T}{\rho}}$ is known as the wave speed. This is the wave equation, a [[Linear PDEs#Second order linear PDEs|partial differential equation]]

# d'Alembert Solution:

Let $f(y),g(z)$ be arbitrary functions of a single variable. Define $u(t,x)=f(x-ct)+g(x+ct)$, we claim that this satisfies the wave equation:$$\Huge \frac{\partial^2u}{\partial t^2}=(-c)^2f''+(c)^2g''=c^2(f''+g''),\,\,\frac{\partial^2u}{\partial x^2}=f''+g''$$This obviously satisfies the wave equation. We show that this is the most general equation by giving initial condistions as arbitrary functions:$$\Huge u(x,0)=R(x),\,\,\frac{\partial u}{\partial t}(x,0)=u_t(x,0)=S(x)$$Then we need to find functions $f,g$ such that $u(x,t)=f(x-ct)+g(x+ct)$ satisfies such conditions. It is then clear that:$$\Huge R(x)=f(x)+g(x),\,\,S(x)=-cf'(x)+cg'(x)$$The second of which integrates to give:$$\Huge c^{-1}\int_0^xS(y)dy=-f(x)+g(x)$$One can then combine the two equations to find $f,g$ in terms of $R,S$:$$\Huge u(x,t)=\frac{1}{2}\left[R(x-ct)+R\left(x+ct\right)+\frac{1}{c}\int_{x-ct}^{x+ct}S(y)dy\right]$$
# Superposition:

Since the wave equation is linear, a linear combination of solutions is also a solution.